---
created: 2024-02-22T21:33
updated: 2024-03-03T23:40
tags:
  - journal
---
---
“Solve your own problems and sell the solution” est mon mantra.

“Create your own customers” is my second mantra.

Je vise les gens intéressé par l’entrepreneuriat qui aime apprendre et penser, les créateurs de contenu, les freelances, les coachs consultant et certains type d’entrepreneurs.

Je veux dans ma voie utiliser également mon expérience. Je ferais le lien avec le **gaming**, la pop culture et la culture, la technologie et la science, la culture japonaise et la philosophie, les neurosciences, la psychologie.

---

“In my little group chat with my tech CEO friends, there’s this betting pool for the first year that there is a one-person billion-dollar company. Which would have been unimaginable without AI and now will happen.” - Sam Altman

- Si vous n’avez pas d’idées, lisez.
- Si vous avez des idées mais ne savez comment les exprimer, écrivez.
- Si vous avez des idées et la clarté pour les appliquez, construisez.

Si vous êtes perdu, apprenez
Vous pouvez devenir n’importe quel rôle, ne vous imposez pas de limite

Vos croyances influences, vos pensées, vos pensées influencent vos émotions, vos émotions influences votre mindset. Votre mindset influence la manière dont vous percevez le monde

L’Homme de la renaissance numérique
L’Homme des Lumières du XXIe siècle

---
## Modification Newsletter

Retirer les petits bonjour et directement capter l’attention, comme les 30 secondes d’une vidéo Youtube. Garder le résumé de post.

La solution à l’ennui et l’anxiété c’est de construire

“Do the **Work You Love** With **People You Like**  The **Way You Want**”

“You can have brilliant ideas, but if you can’t get them across, your ideas won’t get you anywhere.” – Lee Iacocca

Your success as a thought leader depends on your ability to leverage your ideas. Knowing how to recognise the most valuable, applicable, and marketable ideas and build content around them is vital. 

Working on the principle of **creating once and using often**, you’ll learn proven techniques for creating unique intellectual property that can be adapted to different formats and customised for different audiences.

“Capture, package and deliver your expertise to the world”

Every industry, business sector and profession has thought leaders. They are the innovators, teachers, dreamers and experts who expand the boundaries of knowledge, share their wisdom and inspire others to think and act at a higher level. Esteemed by peers and emulated by their followers, their ideas radiate beyond their field and touch the lives of many. You’ve read their books, seen them interviewed in the media and watched their TED talks. People clamour to attend their workshops. Organisations pay handsomely to engage them as a consultant or to deliver a keynote.

However, not all great thinkers and experts become leaders and not all thought leaders achieve the recognition and financial reward they deserve.

[Free Framer Course - Overview & Fundamentals](h
```embed
title: "Free Framer Course - Overview & Fundamentals"
image: "https://assets-global.website-files.com/63db1886aa2e994d4cf67ab9/64d701c3ab17a00828ece76d_Framer%20free%20course%20open%20graph.jpg"
description: "Understanding Positioning: Absolute, Relative, Fixed, and Sticky"
url: "https://www.imeddjabi.com/framer-course/module-1"
```

# Les nouvelles personnes de la journée

- Paul Saffo
- Matt Church
- Regina Anaejionu

[Thought Leader Academy for Women Entrepreneurs: Create Your Signature Talk and Develop Your Personal Brand | Speaking Your Brand](https://www.speakingyourbrand.com/academy/)

[Thought Leader Academy - Sara Connell](https://www.saraconnell.com/thought-leader-academy)


